MSC2778: Providing authentication method for appservice users (#2778)
matrix-org/matrix-doc: proposals/2778-appservice-login.md

Note: Implementations MUST use the `identifier.type`=`m.id.user` method of specifying the
localpart. The deprecated top-level `user` field **cannot** use this login flow type. This
is deliberate so as to coax developers into using the new identifier format when implementing
new flows.

The response body should be unchanged from the existing `/login` specification.

If:

- The access token is not provided
- The access token does not correspond to a appservice
- Or the user has not previously been registered

Then the servers should reject with HTTP 403, with an `errcode` of `"M_FORBIDDEN"`. 

If the access token does not correspond to a appservice that manages this user, then the `errcode` should be `"M_EXCLUSIVE"`.

Homeservers should ignore the `access_token` parameter if a type other than
`m.login.application_service` has been provided.

The expected flow for appservices would be to `/register` their users, and
then `/login` to generate the appropriate device.

## Potential issues

This proposal means that there will be more calls to make when setting up a appservice user, when
using encryption. While this could be done during the registration step, this would prohibit creating

> new devices should the appservice intentionally or inadvertently lost the client-side device data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
new devices should the appservice intentionally or inadvertently lose the client-side device data.
```
or
```suggestion
new devices should the appservice intentionally or inadvertently have lost the client-side device data.
```

it that way.

Some community members have used implementation details such as a "shared secret" authentication method to
log into the accounts without having to use the /login process at all. Synapse provides such a function,
but also means the appservice can now authenticate as any user on the homeserver. This seems undesirable from a
security standpoint.

A third option could be to create a new endpoint that simply creates a new device for an appservice user on demand.
Given the rest of the matrix eco-system does this with /login, and /login is already extensible with `type`, it would
create more work for all parties involved for little benefit.

Finally, `POST /register` does already return a `device_id`, `access_token` for appservice users by default. However critically
this means that bridges will need to be designed to store the access_token and device_id from the point of creating the user,
so older bridges would be unable to get an access token for existing users as `POST /register` would fail.
It would difficult to log out these tokens if they got exposed additionally, as the AS would not be able to fetch a new access token.

> Furthermore, the ability to generate access tokens for real users who registered elsewhere would not be possible with this mechanism. 

Reviewer 2: Should `/register` maybe still return a `device_id` anyway, so that this is symmetrical to how normal clients generate `access_token`s and `device_id`s? Appservices can still call `/login` to generate a new token at a later point anyway. Or should it intentionally not do that, so that large appservices, that don't use that, don't need to opt out and calling `/login` once more per user is not that much additional overhead?

Reviewer 3: I'm also a bit confused by this section. I think its fine to have `/login` *and* `/register`, but calling throwing away the device in `/register` just to call `/login` seems a bit silly? 

> It would difficult to log out these tokens if they got exposed additionally, as the AS would not be able to fetch a new access token.

But that's true for `/login` too? Or is the intention that a `/login` logs out other devices for that user?

Reviewer 3: @mscbot concern Why shouldn't we use /register

Author: Unless I'm reading it wrong, I don't think I'm advocating for throwing away the information from `/register`.

>I think its fine to have /login and /register

This *is* my intention because you might want an access token for a user in your namespace that is already registered. This MSC essentially just ensures the bridge can call /login for it's users without having to set a password for each one.

Author: @erikjohnston I've attempted to tidy up the section and bullet point the concerns with this method because I think it was not clear.

Reviewer 3: I'm still confused why you're saying the following then:

> The expected flow for appservices would be to /register their users, and then /login to generate the appropriate device.

Why do appservices need to register *and then* login, creating multiple devices?

Author: Okay, I think I was confused because this thread is highlighting the wrong section and it would be better to comment on the lines that are confusing directly. I've amended that line to explain when /register can be used and when /login is needed.

# MSC2778: Providing authentication method for appservice users

Appservices within Matrix are increasingly attempting to support End-to-End Encryption. As such, they
need a way to generate devices for their users so that they can participate in E2E rooms. In order to
do so, this proposal suggests implementing an appservice extension to the 
[`POST /login` endpoint](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/r0.6.0#post-matrix-client-r0-login).

Appservice users do not usually need to login as they do not need their own access token, and do not
traditionally need a "device". However, E2E encryption demands that at least one user in a room has a
Matrix device which means bridge users need to be able to generate a device on demand. In the past,
bridge developers have used the bridge bot's device for all bridge users in the room, but this causes

> problems should the bridge wish to only join ghosts to a room (e.g. for DMs).

Reviewer 4: You can send encrypted messages without a device (using someone elses device). Right now it might be classifiable as a bug, but I think the long-term goal should be to have single-device appservices where clients are aware that it's all one appservice.

## Proposal

A new `type` is to be added to `POST /login`: `m.login.application_service`

The `/login` endpoint may now take an `access_token` in the same way that other
authenticated endpoints do. No additional parameters should be specified in the request body.

Example request

```json
{
  "type": "m.login.application_service",
  "identifier": {
    "type": "m.id.user",
    "user": "_bridge_alice"
  }
}
```

Note: Implementations MUST use the `identifier.type`=`m.id.user` method of specifying the
localpart. The deprecated top-level `user` field **cannot** use this login flow type. This
is deliberate so as to coax developers into using the new identifier format when implementing
new flows.

The response body should be unchanged from the existing `/login` specification.

If one of the following conditions are true:

- The access token is not provided
- The access token does not correspond to a appservice
- Or the user has not previously been registered

Then the servers MUST reject with HTTP 403, with an `errcode` of `"M_FORBIDDEN"`. 

If the access token DOES correspond to a appservice but the user is not inside its namespace,

> then the `errcode` should be `"M_EXCLUSIVE"`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
then the `errcode` must be `"M_EXCLUSIVE"`.
```

?

Given the rest of the matrix eco-system does this with /login, and /login is already extensible with `type`, it would
create more work for all parties involved for little benefit.

Finally, `POST /register` does already return a `device_id` and `access_token` so appservices
could store this information rather than calling `POST /login` at all. This does however present a few problems:

- Quite a few appservices which only support unencrypted messaging do not use/store the `device_id`/`access_token` from a register call.
  In the event that an appservice eventually gains the ability to support encryption, they would be unable to fetch a new `device_id`/
  `access_token` for any existing users (as `/register` would fail for an existing user).
- If user tokens were lost or exposed, there is no way to programattically create new access tokens for these users.
- Finally, if a user was registered externally and the appservice would like to masquerade as it, it would be unable to fetch
  an access token for that user.
  
While `POST /register` does work, it is impactical as the sole method of fetching an access token.
  

Most appservices

> which do not implement encryption do not store this information as neither the device_id or access_token are needed f However critically

Reviewer 6: Not sure what's happened with this stray 'f'

Reviewer 7: These look like notes that were used to build the above bullet point list and can probably be deleted?

> Most appservices
> which do not implement encryption do not store this information as neither the device_id or access_token are needed f However critically
> this means that bridges will need to be designed to store the access_token and device_id from the point of creating the user,
> so older bridges would be unable to get an access token for existing users as `POST /register` would fail.
> It would difficult to log out these tokens if they got exposed additionally, as the AS would not be able to fetch a new access token.
> Furthermore, the ability to generate access tokens for real users who registered elsewhere would not be possible with this mechanism. 

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion

```

Reviewer 9: @penn5 why?

Reviewer 9: ah, I see, I think. In general, it's good to add explanatory comments to things.

Reviewer 8: This text was duplicated above and has huge typos

## Security considerations

Appservices could use this new functionality to generate devices for any userId that are within its namespace e.g. setting the

> user namespace regex to `@.*:example.com` would allow appservice to control anyone on the homeserver. While this sounds scary, in practise

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
user namespace regex to `@.*:example.com` would allow appservice to control anyone on the homeserver. While this sounds scary, in practice
```

this is not a problem because:

> - Appservice namespaces are mainained by the homeserver admin. If the namespace were to change, then it's reasonable

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- Appservice namespaces are maintained by the homeserver admin. If the namespace were to change, then it's reasonable
```

  to assume that the server admin is aware. There is no defense mechanism to stop a malicious server admin from creating new

>   devices for a given user's account as they could also do so by simply modifying the database.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
  devices for a given user's account, which they could also do by simply modifying the database.
```

- While an appservice *could* try to masquerade as a user maliciously without the server admin expecting it, it would still 
  be bound by the restrictions of the namespace. Server admins are expected to be aware of the implications of adding new
  appservices to their server so the burden of responsibility lies with the server admin.

- Appservices already can /sync as any user using the `as_token` and send any messages as any user in the namespace, the only
  difference is that without a dedicated access token they are unable to receive device messages. While in theory this
  does make them unable to see encrypted messages, this is not designed to be a security mechanism.

> In conclusion this MSC only automates the creation of new devices for users inside an AS namespace, which is something

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
In conclusion, this MSC only automates the creation of new devices for users inside an AS namespace, which is something
```

# MSC2778: Providing authentication method for appservice users

Appservices within Matrix are increasingly attempting to support End-to-End Encryption. As such, they
need a way to generate devices for their users so that they can participate in E2E rooms. In order to
do so, this proposal suggests implementing an appservice extension to the 
[`POST /login` endpoint](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/r0.6.0#post-matrix-client-r0-login).

Appservice users do not usually need to login as they do not need their own access token, and do not

> traditionally need a "device". However E2E encryption demands that all users in a room have a device

Reviewer 10: The downside will be that the AS has access to all of a user's encrypted messages, not only for the rooms it is bridging. From the moment you bridge one encrypted room, you can't have any e2e encrypted conversations anymore... The only way to avoid that would be to associate a list of rooms with an e2ee device, with the default being all.

Reviewer 4: How would logging in as ghost users or the bridge bot affect non-bridged rooms? The AS still won't receive keys or messages for any rooms it's not in.

Reviewer 10: Oh, sorry, I misunderstood indeed. This would be used for ghost users that are only in bridged rooms. I was imagining this being used for regular matrix users that are in some bridged rooms, but that's not how bridging works probably :)

> which means bridge users need to be able to generate a device on demand.

Reviewer 4: Technically only one user from the bridge needs to have a device, not all users in a room. This will useful even if it's only used for logging in as the bridge bot though

Author: Reworded this a bit.

## Proposal

A new `type` is to be added to `POST /login`.

`m.login.application_service`

The `/login` endpoint may now take an `access_token` in the same way that other
authenticated endpoints do. No additional parameters should be specified in the request body.

Example request

```json
{
  "type": "m.login.application_service",
  "identifier": {
    "type": "m.id.user",

>     "user": "alice"

Reviewer 4: This would make it clearer that the appservice can only log in as appservice-managed users:

```suggestion
    "user": "_bridge_alice"
```

  }
}
```

The response body should be unchanged from the existing `/login` specification.

If:

- The access token is not provided
- The access token does not correspond to a appservice

> - The access token does not correspond to a appservice that manages this user

Reviewer 4: Any particular reason this returns `M_FORBIDDEN` instead of `M_EXCLUSIVE` like identity assertion does?

Author: I wanted to follow the spec for /login's standard:

>M_FORBIDDEN: The provided authentication data was incorrect.

Which is technically true in this case. You could probably make an argument for either given this treads the boundary of ASes/Clients, but I don't see a super compelling reason to change this.

Reviewer 9: This should be M_EXCLUSIVE

Author: This has been done.

being part of the header/params to the request. An argument could be made for either, but since the specification
expects the appservice to pass the token this way in all requests, including `/register`, it seems wise to keep
it that way.

Some community members have used implementation details such as a "shared secret" authentication method to
log into the accounts without having to use the /login process at all. Synapse provides such a function,
but also means the appservice can now authenticate as any user on the homeserver. This seems undesirable from a
security standpoint.

A third option could be to create a new endpoint that simply creates a new device for an appservice user on demand.
Given the rest of the matrix eco-system does this with /login, and /login is already extensible with `type`, it would
create more work for all parties involved for little benefit.

## Security considerations

The /login endpoint will generate an access token which can be used to control the appservice user, which
is superflous as the appservice `as_token` should be used to authenticate all requests on behalf of ghosts.

> This can safely be ignored or used, but is an extra token hanging around.

Reviewer 11: Would it be a good idea to not generate an access token at all when `m.login.application_service` is used?

Author: It's a bit tricky. The access token is tied to the device, so we do actually kinda need it. (Unless we restrict AS users to one device, or allow ASes to specify a device though query params)

Author: Having thought this through, and my own response I'm going to remove this concern.

## Unstable prefix

Implementations should use `uk.half-shot.msc2778.login.application_service` for `type` given in the

> `POST /login` until this lands in a released version of the specification.

Reviewer 4: Support for this should probably be advertised somewhere, probably in `GET /login` and/or unstable features. (I guess this is mostly a comment for the synapse PR if advertising in `GET /login` is enough)

Reviewer 4: This is resolved now (synapse added it to the `GET /login` flows), but GitHub forgot to allow the "resolve" button for the user who created the thread

new devices should the appservice intentionally or inadvertently lost the client-side device data.

## Alternatives

One minor tweak to the current proposal could be to include the token as part of the auth data, rather than
being part of the header/params to the request. An argument could be made for either, but since the specification
expects the appservice to pass the token this way in all requests, including `/register`, it seems wise to keep
it that way.

Some community members have used implementation details such as a "shared secret" authentication method to
log into the accounts without having to use the /login process at all. Synapse provides such a function,
but also means the appservice can now authenticate as any user on the homeserver. This seems undesirable from a
security standpoint.

A third option could be to create a new endpoint that simply creates a new device for an appservice user on demand.
Given the rest of the matrix eco-system does this with /login, and /login is already extensible with `type`, it would
create more work for all parties involved for little benefit.

## Security considerations

> None

Reviewer 9: This section should always be filled out, either describing the security impact of letting appservices impersonate users and harvest encryption, or if there's truly nothing to worry about then a description as to why.

Author: I've added some words :+1:. I'm not sure if they are the best words, but hopefully someone can review those words.

The response body should be unchanged from the existing `/login` specification.

If one of the following conditions are true:

- The access token is not provided
- The access token does not correspond to a appservice
- Or the user has not previously been registered

Then the servers MUST reject with HTTP 403, with an `errcode` of `"M_FORBIDDEN"`. 

> If the access token DOES correspond to a appservice but the user is not inside it's namespace,

Reviewer 9: its

- The access token is not provided
- The access token does not correspond to a appservice
- Or the user has not previously been registered

Then the servers should reject with HTTP 403, with an `errcode` of `"M_FORBIDDEN"`. 

> If the access token does not correspond to a appservice that manages this user, then the `errcode` should be `"M_EXCLUSIVE"`.

Reviewer 9: only if the access token is another application service though? It can be a bit confusing, but `M_EXCLUSIVE` is meant to be "an appservice tried to use a user outside of its own namespaces but that resides in *another* appservice's *exclusive* namespace".

Otherwise this would be M_FORBIDDEN, which is presumably the error code non-appservice users can expect.

Reviewer 9: @mscbot concern M_EXCLUSIVE error code is unclear on usage

Author: Yeah, that was my intention. Words are hard.

Author: Words have been adjusted.

this is not a problem because:

- Appservice namespaces are mainained by the homeserver admin. If the namespace were to change, then it's reasonable
  to assume that the server admin is aware. There is no defense mechanism to stop a malicious server admin from creating new
  devices for a given user's account as they could also do so by simply modifying the database.

- While an appservice *could* try to masquerade as a user maliciously without the server admin expecting it, it would still 
  be bound by the restrictions of the namespace. Server admins are expected to be aware of the implications of adding new
  appservices to their server so the burden of responsibility lies with the server admin.

- Appservices already can /sync as any user using the `as_token` and send any messages as any user in the namespace, the only
  difference is that without a dedicated access token they are unable to receive device messages. While in theory this
  does make them unable to see encrypted messages, this is not designed to be a security mechanism.

- An appservice trying to log in as a user will always create a new device, which means the user would be informed of the

>   new device on their existing sessions. It should be very obvious if a malicous appservice is creating new devices on your account.

Reviewer 9: this is untrue: the spec has no such mechanism, but Element does. 

The remaining points are convincing enough where this point shouldn't need including though.

Author: Fair, can uninclude this one.
